# Velocity-Estimation-using-Single-Camera
A part of driver assist system, we have developed a program to estimate the velocity and distance of an identified vehicle in the view-frame. We have also developed a code to help estimate the lane along with its curve.

This project consists of 3 broad aspects. 
The 1st one being a custom object detector model trained for 6 different class which include HMV, LMV, 2-Wheeler, Auto, Pedestrian & Animal. Over 5,300 images were trained using YOLOv8 for 225 epochs and 80+% validation was achieved. This module also contains another object detection model which is trained for only Car and 2-Wheeler but for separate orientations. 4 orientations including Front/Rear, 45_deg, 90_deg and 135_deg have been trained for with suitable images of each Car and 2-Wheeler. This was done in order to identify the orientation of the vehicle as well along with its class such that the distance can be appropriately calculated irrespective of its inclination with respect to the camera. This dataset consisted of 3,600 images and was trained for 200 epochs. It attained low validation and hence is just used to create a proof of concept. 

The 2nd part of the project consisted of a lane detection model. It includes a program which can identify and track lanes on which the vehicle is being driven on and segment it from the surroundings. Input was taken in from the camera and perspective transformation was performed to obtain a bird's eye view of the road. A colour detection code was used to separate out the road from its surroundings based on its distinguished colours. Hue and saturation levels were varied to obtain a clean segmentation. A histogram was created to segment out the lane. A region of interest was defined by plotting 4 points. 

The 3rd and final part was creating a program which would estimate the distance and relative velocity and based on these parameters, classify whether the identified vehicle is a threat or not. The formula used to calculate the distance makes use of the fact that the average of identified class is known to us. It uses the focal length of the camera, known width of the object and its apparent width in pixels in the frame and hence computes the estimated distance. An accuracy of 85+% was achieved for distance estimation. Velocity esimation is done by calculating the change in apparent width in each frame and hence divided by change in time to return the velocity. A low confidence was achieved for this as a lot of tweaking is required but is fixable. The last part is about threat estimaiton. A simple if condition was implemented to callout a potential threat if the distance is less than 60m. The box colour changes from green to red as soon as the object is within 60m.
